---
title:  "Returning multiple values: semantics"
date:   2023-06-03 1:02:21 -0500
categories: wcpl return multiple values
---

This is an announcement of an upcoming feature. Please see the previous
post for syntactic aspect of WCPL multiple values support.

<!--more-->

Implementing support for returning and accepting multiple values in WCPL is
easy: WASM stack architecture makes collecting and spreading the values as
natural as passing arguments. In fact, the internal mechanism is exactly
the same, so the same code could be used to generate pass-values / return-values 
code sequences. WCPL already uses the multiple-values convention by representing
`void` functions as WASM procedures returning no values, so extending it to
cover 2 and more values is straightforward.

There is one problem though: programmers would expect that multiple values will
behave as single values with respect to type promotion, e.g. if one returns an
int and a float, but the accepting interface expects, say, a long long and a
double, WCPL should generate the appropriate conversion/promotion instructions.
It is easy with a single value because instructions work with the value on the
top of the stack, but harder if values deeper in stack need to be promoted.
WASM has no stack manipulation instructions allowing one to reach deeper into
the stack, so WCPL has to generate temporary variables (registers), move the 
values from the stack to the variables, and then promote them to the new types
while putting them back to the stack.

There are also several design decisions that need to be made. WCPL's multiple
values implementation stops short of implementing the following potentially
useful features:

- Expressions returning multiple values. Current implementation allows the
  `return` statement and right-hand-side of the multiple values definition
  or assignment to be an initializer-style *display* (a list of expressions
  in curly braces) or a call to a function returning multiple values, but
  nothing else.

- Multiple-values casts, e.g. `({double, double})foo()`. Automatic promotions
  are supported, but explicit mv casts are not.

- Dropping "extra" values as a part of an automatic promotion. WCPL supports
  "casting to void", i.e. dropping all return values when mv function call
  is executed in statement context, but does not allow passing N values to a
  context expecting less than K < N values unless K is 0.

- Spicing multiple return values into another call. Current implementation
  requires the accepted values to be stored in variables and other locations,
  but does not allow feeding them into another function call or operation
  directly. Some languages allow that, e.g.: `bar(x, foo()..., y)` *splices*
  values returned by `foo` into `bar`'s argument list, while `(+)(foo()...)` 
  adds two values returned by `foo`.
  
We will end this post with a complete example, semonstrating most aspects
of multiple values manipulation:

{% highlight C %}
#include <stdio.h>

{long long, float} foo() 
{ 
  return {5, 42}; /* vals promoted */
}

{double, float} bar() 
{ 
  return foo(); /* first val promoted */
}

double foobar() 
{ 
  {double a, double b} = foo(); /* both vals promoted */
  return b/a; 
}

double baz() 
{ 
  double da[1], d, *pd = &d; 
  {da[0], *pd} = bar(); /* second val promoted */
  return d/da[0];
}

double quux({long long, float}(*pf)())
{
  {double a, double b} = (*pf)(); /* both vals promoted */
  return b/a; 
}

int main() {
  foo(); /* ignore results */
  bar(); /* ditto */
  printf("%g, %g, %g\n", foobar(), baz(), quux(&foo));
  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Please note that both in function definitions and prototypes the specification
of the types for returned values allows *naming* the values, e.g.:

{% highlight C %}
/* declaration */
static {long long position, float weight} foo();

/* definition */
static {long long position, float weight} foo()
{
  return {5, 42};
}
{% endhighlight %}

We don't recommend this practice for function definitions: the names of
the returned values are just ignored by the compiler, but may confuse the
reader of the code: they are not variables and can neither be read nor 
modified.
