---
title:  "Variadic macros, countof()"
date:   2023-05-23 5:52:21 -0500
categories: wcpl update varargs stdarg
---

Although WCPL macros, having a completely different nature from C macros 
(expression-based vs. token-based), are limited compared to their C counterparts,
some of advanced features of C macros are supported in a form that allows for
interoperability. One of such features is *variadic macros*, i.e. macros accepting
variable number of arguments.

WCPL implementation of variadic macros is also expression-based. Parameterized
macro can have `...` (ellipsis) as its last parameter; use of such a macro must
provide at least as many parameters as there are non-ellipsis parameters in the
parameter list. Any number of additional parameters can be supplied in macro
use; they will be available for substitution in the body of the macro (the
*replacement list*, in C terms).

A parameterized macro with `...` as the last parameter is said to *bind* the
`...` name to the list of actual parameters remaining after all non-ellipsis
parameters are assigned. If `...` is bound by the macro, its use in the macro
body refers to "overflow" macro parameters. If `...` is not bound by the macro,
use of `...` in macro body refers to outside binding of `...`, e.g. its use
as the ellipsis parameter of a function.

In the body of the variadic macro, `...` can be used in any form that looks
like a function call, in any position, and any number of times. All such uses
are replaced by actual "overflow" macro parameter expressions.

C99-like `__VA_ARGS__` name can be used as an alias for `...` in the body
of a variadic macro. This allows for writing of some variadic macros that
will work the same way in WCPL and in C99, e.g.:

{% highlight C %}
#define debug(msg, ...) (fprintf(stderr, msg, __VA_ARGS__))
{% endhighlight %}

In WCPL, one can also use `...` in the body directly:

{% highlight C %}
#define debug(msg, ...) (fprintf(stderr, msg, ...)) /* WCPL only */ 
{% endhighlight %}

Since in WCPL the replacement is done on expression level, no special
comma-related hacks are needed, so `__VA_OPT__` is not supported. 

There is also a place for `countof(...)` in WCPL variadic macro: as
one would expect, it is replaced by the count of "overflow" arguments
in macro use:

{% highlight C %}
extern struct list *make_list(size_t cnt, ...);
#define list(...) (make_list(countof(...), ...)) /* WCPL only */

/* list(10, 20, 30) expands to make_list(3, 10, 20, 30) */
{% endhighlight %}

