---
title:  "WCPL macros"
date:   2023-05-22 5:52:21 -0500
categories: wcpl macros
---

WCPL has a simple macro mechanism that *mimics* most frequent patterns used by
C macro writers while being implemented via an entirely different mechanism.
While C macros manipulate sequences of tokens, WCPL macros manipulate
complete expressions; substitution is done on the level of abstract syntax trees.
Although it makes it impossible to use some advanced tricks empoyed by C
macro experts, such as introducing unpaired braces, substituting types, 
and glueing identifiers from individual parts, most popular macro patterns
still can be employed, and made to behave in the same way between WCPL and C.

WCPL macros have two flavors: expression macros and statement macros.
Expression macros have a complete expression on the right-hand side of the
macro. Formally, it is a `primary_expression` grammar category; informally, it
is either a literal constant (no sign for numerical literals!) or any single
expression enclosed in parentheses, e.g.:

{% highlight C %}
#define NINE 9
#define MINUS_NINE (-9) /* has to be parenthesized! */
#define DBL_MAX 1.79769313486231570815e+308
#define stdin (&_iob[0]) 
{% endhighlight %}

Statement macro's right-hand side is single statement wrapped in a "fake do",
i.e. preceded by the `do` keyword and followed by `while (0)` trailer. It may
look strange, but it is indeed a standard C practice, allowing uses of such
macros to be followed by a semicolon, as required by C statement grammar, e.g.:

{% highlight C %}
#define p2up(x, res) do { \
  size_t c = clz32(x); \
  res = 32-c; \
} while (0)
{% endhighlight %}

Please note two additional features in the example above: the name of the macro
being defined can be followed by a parenthesized list of argument names (no space
is allowed between the name and the open parenthesis), and long macro bodies can be
wrapped into multiple lines if internal end-of-line characters are "escaped"
via a backslash. The latter feature is optional in WCPL (it always reads a
complete grammar category, not a token list), but supported for compatibility
with C preprocessor — the macro above works in the same way both in C and WCPL.

Expression macros can be parameterized as well. Please note that WCPL macro uses,
which look like function calls, can only accept grammatically valid *expressions*
as parameters. There is no such limitation in C, where any sequences of tokens
will do, as long as they are separated by colons. Example:

{% highlight C %}
/* works in C and WCPL */
#define getc(p) (--(p)->cnt >= 0 ? (unsigned char)*(p)->ptr++ : _fillbuf(p))

/* works in C, but not in WCPL */
#define cast(type, x) ((type)(x))  /* C can use types as macro parameters */ 
{% endhighlight %}

WCPL macros can only be defined on top level of the module or header file; they
cannot be re-defined if an earlier definition exists, unless they undefined
via `#undef` first:

{% highlight C %}
#undef NINE
#define NINE "nine"
{% endhighlight %}

Some built-in macros such as `__WCPL__` cannot be undefined or redefined.
Additional macro features will be described in separate posts.
