---
title:  "Conditional compilation"
date:   2023-05-24 5:52:21 -0500
categories: wcpl ifdef conditional
---

To support a wider set of scenarios where WCPL code is also compiled by a regular
C compiler (which is not that hard due to a large shared sublet of constructs), 
WCPL supports a limited set of conditional compilation constructs. The goal was
to allow the insertion of fragments targeting various C compilers and platforms 
to be ignored by WCPL compiler on line-by-line basis. 

These constructs look similar to what C programmers are used to, but are not
based on defined macros and constant expressions. The *conditions* being tested
for inclusion or exclusion of certain blocks of text are just lexical variations
of the *always true* and *always false* themes.

The WCPL compiler treats the following starting constructs as *always true*:

{% highlight C %}
#ifdef __WCPL__
#if defined(__WCPL__)
#if 1
{% endhighlight %}

This is the complementary list of *always false* starting constructs:

{% highlight C %}
#ifndef __WCPL__
#if !defined(__WCPL__)
#if 0
{% endhighlight %}

WCPL conditional compilation block should start with one of the above constructs
at the top level of a module or a header file, and end with the matching ending
construct:

{% highlight C %}
#endif
{% endhighlight %}

The above constructs can contain any amount of whitespace between tokens, but
should each be limited to a single line. They cannot appear inside a top-level
form, only between the forms.

There are additional WCPL constructs which may appear between the starting and
ending constructs. The text following the *always true* starting construct can 
contain a *switch to ignore* line that tells WCPL to ignore the rest of the block 
until the corresponding `#endif` line. This switch-to-ignore line can have one 
of the following two forms:

{% highlight C %}
#elif // any tokens can follow #elif on the same line
#else
{% endhighlight %}

The text between the *always true* starting construct and the *switch to ignore* 
line, or the ending construct if there is no switch, is called *active block*.
The text between the *switch to ignore* line and the ending construct is called
*inactive block*. The compiler processes the top-level forms from the active
block and skips all the lines of the inactive block, just looking for its
ending line.

The overall layout of the conditional compilation block that begins with the 
*always false* starting construct is more complex. The text between its start and
the corresponding ending construct can contain multiple potential switch lines, 
but WCPL is looking for the *always true* switching line that may take one
of the following forms:

{% highlight C %}
#elif defined(__WCPL__)
#elif 1
#else
{% endhighlight %}

Any one of these lines will act as *switch to process* line that would end
current inactive block. The potential switch lines that do not switch may
take one of the following forms:

{% highlight C %}
#elif !defined(__WCPL__)
#elif 0
{% endhighlight %}

If a *switch to process* line is encountered, WCPL considers the text that
follows to be an active block and continues in the manner described above for
the conditional compilation block that opens with *always true* starting
construct.

Effectively, the contents of the conditional compilation block consist
of at most one active block, optionally preceded or followed by inactive
blocks. It is important to note that WCPL's active block can contain
not only regular WCPL top-level forms but also other properly nested
conditional compilation blocks, recursively. The active parts that
are taken for processing should be sequences of 0 or more top-level
forms; conditional compilation constructs (lines) cannot interrupt
top-level forms by appearing inside them.

Since inactive blocks are just skipped line-by-line, their contents
does not have to be restricted as much. In fact, WCPL allows any sequence
of C99 tokens, including arbitrary but properly nested C99 conditional
compilation constructs within its inactive blocks. For inactive blocks,
there is no limitation on where nested conditional compilation blocks
appear with respect to other language constructs, and what expressions 
are used as conditions. 

These sequences usually contain C code targeting other compilers and 
platforms, e.g.:

{% highlight C %}
#if defined(__WCPL__)
// WCPL-specific code
#elif defined(__GNUC__) && defined(__linux)
// Linux-specific code (GCC/Clang)
#elif defined(__GNUC__) && defined(__APPLE__)
// Mac-specific code (GCC/Clang)
#elif defined(_MSC_VER)
// MSVC-specific code
#elif defined(__STDC__)
// code targeting other C compilers
#else
#error "put in your definitions..."
#endif
{% endhighlight %}

While marginally useful in WCPL-only code, these constructs support
some degree of mix-and-match between code targeting different platforms,
which may be useful for code that needs to be compiled as both a WCPL program
and a C program.

